---
layout: post
title: Lab 5 Post
subtitle: Python
gh-repo: daattali/beautiful-jekyll
gh-badge: [star, fork, follow]
tags: [test]
comments: true
---
## The Survey of Scottish Witchcraft Database

On March 8th, 2020, a group of Scottish women gathered to release a campaign to preserve the memory of the victims of witchcraft accusations, asking official national pardon from the Scottish Parliament. In December 2021, First Minister Nicola Sturgeon expressed his support for the bill, opening the way for the representative historical reparation by the acquisition of a national formal apology, but also for the development of institutions and continuing projects to preserve this sensitive page of the country’s history (McGreevy). This is just one of the projects that took place in Scotland to recover the data and keep the memories alive of the Scottish characters of one of Europe’s tragic events: the witch hunt.

Before these legal advancements, Julian Goodare, Lauren Martin, Joyce Miller, and Louise Yeoman headed a research project in the Scottish History Department of the School of History and Classics, at the University of Edinburgh. One of their major accomplishments was the creation of the [Survey of Scottish Witchcraft Database](https://witches.shca.ed.ac.uk/index.cfm?fuseaction=home.main) (*SSWD* from now on), compiling almost 4,000 records of people (both male and female) accused of witchcraft from 1560-1727. The data shows, for example, how many people were accused and executed, their ages, their names, the “evidence” or claims brought against the victims, the dates of trials, and many other pieces of detailed information.

As pointed out by D’Ignazio & Klein (2020), “what gets counted counts”, sharing such objective data might have had a positive impact on the efforts to perpetuate the reflections and discussions on the historical witch prosecutions. That is especially true since the data is available online for other researchers (and the public in general) to navigate. On the other hand, they carefully added one “slowing” feature to the database by requiring personal data to be provided in order to start downloading it (Prescot & Hughes 2018), which emphasizes that, despite the availability of the material, it is also made human stories, traumas, and personal registers that require responsibility and respect.

Scholars and researchers might find the database especially resourceful given the amount of detailed information. For example, not only specific dates and numbers are provided, but also people’s names, which are also linked to their profile in the platform that displays some more details about the accusations and possible connections to other accused people. Certainly, there is an emphasis on the human aspect instead of mere statistics when we learn that, for instance, children as young as nine were already part of the accused, that even singing and dancing was reported as “evidence” of accusation, and that so little information was found on the minority of cases that had any indication of a chance for defense.

Downloading the data from their website, we find a .zip folder with 36 .columns and 36 .csv files, besides another folder with a .mdb file (that I wasn not able to open) and a 72-pages word document with a detailed description of the whole database. One of the .csv files is the central, or main one, and was chosen for this assignment. Because of the extensive amount of data, I focused on this spreadsheet, chosing the columns that referred to the most relevant information: I did not consider the columns that had notes, incomplete data, etc. The result of this selection and the metadata for this essay can be found [HERE] (https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1WPOiU-uua0EJ9NSf2P_QsnrIwguvMctQCVs9RJ2U_-k/edit?usp=sharing).

Important contributions to the studies of witch persecution are provided by this database. The main one is the increase in accuracy (as much as our limitations allow us) about the real numbers of people who were accused and condemned in Scotland. In the past, speculation dominated the discussion, and authors have estimated from 9 million to 100,000 victims in Europe, while today scholars estimate a number closer to 50,000 for the whole continent (Goodare). Besides the numerical revisions, a closer and more analytic view is now offered for the data includes specific locations of the trials, people’s names and connections.
More than useful for scholars, it has become a legal tool to reassess the impact of the Scottish witch persecution to the present day. The findings out of this database are tied to personal and communal heritage, historical debt and memory, thus, a valuable resource not only for that community but for the wider discussions on gender and religious intolerance. However, possibily the project that created the SSWD was finished due to the end of funding provisions, limiting the scope of the project to the database itself. Years later, in 2019, another digital resource was created to expand the initial project, the [Places of Residence for Accused Witches](https://witches.is.ed.ac.uk) (henceforth *PRAW*).

Still, both databases are potentially fruitful for other purposes. The project could expand by collecting pictures of the manuscripts from which the information on the witches was taken, in the form of a virtual exhibit, on the same fashion as [“The World Bewitched”](https://rmc.library.cornell.edu/witchcraft/exhibition/introduction/index.html#modalClosed), kept by the Cornell Library, where the public can see illustrations and brief information about the manuscripts, their context and relevance. Another possibility is to create pedagogical resources for school and college classes, such as the [Colored Conventions Project](https://coloredconventions.org/teaching/). Finally, it would be interesting to investigate the current print publications at the time of the witch persecutions and possible connections to the cases reported in the database.

To continually expand this agenda, however, the researchers still need support, in terms of personnel, funding, access to registers and the necessary time span. In the descriptive word document, for example, the authors recognize that there are some other sources to be consulted, but the best was done within the period they had been stablished for the undertake. For example, while the database extensively display information about accused people, there is little uncovered about the people and the strategies for the legal defense of the accused, which is one evidence of the need for a longer investigation even for the first initiated project. These omissions do not diminish the value of what has been collected: it just proves that it still deserves attention, research, and consideration.

**References**

D’Ignazio, C., & Klein, L. (2020). 4. “What Gets Counted Counts.” In Data Feminism. Retrieved from https://data-feminism.mitpress.mit.edu/pub/h1w0nbqp
Goodare, Julian. “The European Witch-Hunt”. Routledge, 2011.
McGreevy, Nora. “Scotland Considers Pardon for Thousands of Accused 'Witches'.” Smithsonian.com, Smithsonian Institution, 6 Jan. 2022, https://www.smithsonianmag.com/smart-news/scotland-considers-pardon-for-thousands-of-accused-witches-180979316/.
Prescott, Andrew & Hughes, Lorna. “Why Do We Digitize?: The Case for Slow Digitization,” Archive Journal, 2018. http://www.archivejournal.net/essays/why-do-we-digitize-the-case-for-slow-digitization/
